- Every leadership role is unique in its own way,
but in the software development field,
they fall into two broad categories.
The first is what I call a player-coach role.
This is where in addition to leading the team,
you're also an active developer on it.
These positions have titles like lead software developer
or software engineering lead.
The challenge with this type of role
is being comfortable with delegating
a large portion of the work
so you can dedicate enough time to leading the team.
You might be tempted or feel obligated
to take on the majority of the development, but don't do it.
It causes you to focus less
on the coaching aspect of your position
and prevents the team from reaching its full potential.
When you help individuals build their skills,
it makes the entire team more capable,
which scales much better than doing all the work yourself.
If your team's workload drastically increases,
you'll be glad that you invested the time
to develop members of your team that you can count on
to independently lead a project.
The second category is a pure coaching role,
where your focus is solely on leading the team,
which does all of the actual development work.
These roles often carry titles like software manager
or software engineering manager.
When promoted into this type of role,
some high-performing developers
find it to be a tough transition
because it can cause a little internal conflict
for those that pride themselves on their coding abilities.
If you're presented with the opportunity
to take on a leadership position,
make sure you understand and are comfortable with
how your new responsibilities will be allocated.
Don't just go by the title and position description,
because they can be misleading.
Talk to someone
because it could be the turning point in your career
where you begin to diverge away from actually writing code,
and if that's your passion,
you'll want to carefully consider your decision.
In roles where you will not be doing hands-on development,
I recommend starting a personal project outside of work
or contributing to an open source project.
It helps maintain your technical skills
and keeps your knowledge relevant as technology changes.
This allows you to relate to the team as you lead it.
No matter what situation you find yourself in,
leading and building the team
should always be your top priority.
The best leaders are comfortable with and support
high-potential members of their team
as they transition into leaders themselves.
It really allows their teams to excel
and prevents the leader from becoming a bottleneck.
So when your organization hands you
a bit of formal authority,
I encourage you to slice it up
and divide it among the members of your team.
It empowers them, and you'll be amazed at how they respond.